---
author: Thinking Out Loud
author_tag: ajdecon
blog_subtitle: works in progress and scattered thoughts, often about computers
blog_title: Computing – thinking out loud
blog_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org
category: ajdecon
date: '2022-01-15 16:00:00'
layout: post
original_url: https://thinking.ajdecon.org/2022/01/15/toy-programs-for-learning-a-new-language/
slug: toy-programs-for-learning-a-new-language
title: Toy programs for learning a new language
---

<p>It used to be that I&#8217;d get interested in a new programming language, but I wouldn&#8217;t have a new project to use it for and had trouble knowing how to start. I have trouble really grasping a new language without building something in it, and &#8220;X by example&#8221; or working through a book don&#8217;t really do the job.</p>




<p>What&#8217;s helped me lately is to build an array of &#8220;standard&#8221; toy programs that I understand reasonably well, and that I can use to explore the new language and figure out how to do something real in it.</p>




<p>Right now, my toy program collection consists of:</p>




<ul><li>A link shortening service, like <a href="https://bit.ly">bit.ly</a> or <a href="https://tinyurl.com/">tinyurl</a>, along with a HTTP API for adding and removing links</li><li>A <a href="https://scipython.com/book/chapter-7-matplotlib/examples/the-two-dimensional-diffusion-equation/">2D diffusion simulation</a></li><li>A &#8220;system package inventory&#8221; program, that builds a list of all the RPMs/DEBs installed on a Linux machine and shoves them into a SQLite database</li></ul>



<p>This is almost never what I&#8217;d call production-quality code. For example, when I&#8217;m writing these toy programs, I rarely write unit tests (until I start exploring the test libraries for the language!). But they&#8217;re still very valuable learning tools, and give me space to explore some very different use-cases.</p>




<p>I almost always write all three in a given language, but the order depends a lot on what I think the new language will be good for. For example, I&#8217;ll  write the &#8220;system package inventory&#8221; program first if I think the new language might be handy for system administration tools. It&#8217;s a great way to see how well the language plays with a common Linux environment, how painful it is to use SQLite, and to get practice writing CLI tools in it. I&#8217;ll often augment the basic &#8220;scan and store&#8221; functionality with a CLI to do frequent queries, like &#8220;on what date was this package last upgraded&#8221;.</p>




<p>On the other hand, if I think I&#8217;m going to use the new language for a bunch of numerical work, I&#8217;ll start with the diffusion simulation. When I write that, I often start with a naive implementation and then start playing with profilers and other performance tools, or try to parallelize the simulation. This is also a great excuse to dig into any plotting tools commonly used with the language.</p>




<p>These toy programs are also handy if I want to explore new ways to integrate a service into a larger production environment. For example, I might start with the link shortening service, deploying the service itself statelessly and persisting the list of links into a PostgreSQL DB. Then I start complicating things&#8230;</p>




<ul><li>Let&#8217;s add logging!</li><li>And tracing!</li><li>It&#8217;s always a good idea to expose Prometheus metrics</li><li>And wouldn&#8217;t it be handy to support multiple database backends?</li><li>Now wrap it all in a Helm chart for handy deployment</li></ul>



<p>I imagine I&#8217;m not the only person to have a standard collection of learning projects for new languages. If you do this too, what does your project list look like?</p>