---
author: Campus Research Computing Consortium (CaRCC)
author_tag: carcc
blog_subtitle: Campus Research Computing Consortium
blog_title: carcc.org
blog_url: https://carcc.org
category: carcc
date: '2022-06-21 20:30:31'
layout: post
original_url: https://carcc.org/2022/06/21/certified-cyberinfrastructure-facilitator-training-and-development-cciftd-bof-at-pearc22/
slug: certified-cyberinfrastructure-facilitator-training-and-development-cciftd-bof-at-pearc22
title: Certified Cyberinfrastructure Facilitator Training and Development (CCIFTD)
  BoF at PEARC22
---

<p>Attending PEARC22? Don&#8217;t miss this birds of a feather (BoF) session organized by Henry Neeman (University of Oklahoma), Dana Brunson (Internet2), and Dirk Colbry (Michigan State University).</p>




<p><strong>Thursday, July 14  from 9-10am in the Berkeley/Clarendon rooms</strong></p>




<p><strong>Overview:</strong> The Certified Cyberinfrastructure Facilitator<br />Training and Development (CCIFTD) program is a first-of-its- kind, non matriculated certification of professional development for CI Facilitators. CCIFTD&#8217;s role is to attest to proficiency in core skills needed for facilitating computing/data-intensive research, across all Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The emphasis is on crucial professional/interpersonal skills, and complementary CI technical topics. CCIFTD focuses on establishing both (a) the set of skills and (b) a means for determining whether a CI Facilitator has these skills.</p>




<p><strong>Motivation:</strong> The CI workforce suffers from a critical deficit of CI Facilitators, the CI professionals who work directly with researchers to advance computing/data-intensive aspects of their research. a vital role at many research institutions. Currently, there is a clear sense of the nature and value of the CI Facilitator role, but no well-defined set of skills agreed upon by the CI Facilitator community at large.</p>




<p><strong>Methodology:</strong> 1. Determine the skills that are most valuable<br />for CI Facilitation, by surveying (i) experienced<br />CI Facilitators, (ii) CI organization leaders such as<br />supercomputing center directors, and (iii) STEM researchers<br />who use CI. 2. For each such skill, develop a badge,<br />specifically a training mechanism, an examination instrument,<br />and its scoring rubric, via pilot testing at workshops and<br />online. 3. Construct certification pathways, subsets of badges<br />that collectively merit certification. 4. Test badging methods.<br />5. Evaluate the CCIFTD program, both formatively during this<br />pilot project and summatively at the end, to improve CCIFTD<br />as it progresses and to determine how successful it has been.</p>