---
author: Campus Research Computing Consortium (CaRCC)
author_tag: carcc
blog_subtitle: Campus Research Computing Consortium
blog_title: carcc.org
blog_url: https://carcc.org
category: carcc
date: '2022-07-29 22:29:15'
layout: post
original_url: https://carcc.org/2022/07/29/august-people-network-and-rcd-community-calls/
slug: august-people-network-and-rcd-community-calls
title: August People Network and RCD Community Calls
---

<p>Mark your calendars for these upcoming People Network calls (Zoom details at the end). For handy calendar entries, try the <a href="https://carcc.org/events/">CaRCC Events Calendar</a>. We also highlight other calls from our RCD Ecosystem partners and collaborators, as these events touch many, if not all, in our community.</p>




<h2><em>CaRCC People Network Calls:</em></h2>



<h3><a href="https://carcc.org/people-network/data-facing-track/"><strong>Data-Facing Track</strong></a><strong> (first Tuesdays)</strong></h3>



<p>There is no call in August.&nbsp;Join us in September!</p>




<h3><a href="https://carcc.org/people-network/researcher-facing-track/"><strong>Researcher-Facing Track</strong></a><strong> (second Thursdays)</strong></h3>



<p><strong>Highlights from PEARC22</strong>, discussion facilitated by R-F Steering Committee</p>




<p><em>Thurs, August 11th, 1p ET/ 12p CT/ 11a MT/ 10a PT</em></p>




<p>Back by popular demand we bring you the Researcher-Facing PEARC recap for our August call! The advanced computing community reunited in Boston for PEARC22 and during this call we will share highlights, explore what we learned, and discover some nuggets that you may have missed! If you were not able to attend the conference, this will be a great opportunity to get caught up. Please join to contribute your favorite PEARC22 moments. Drawing from what we learned at Boston, we will also dialogue around new topics for the R-F track in the coming year.&nbsp;</p>




<span id="more-4335"></span>



<h3><a href="https://carcc.org/people-network/emerging-centers-track/"><strong>Emerging Centers Track</strong></a><strong> (third Wednesdays)</strong></h3>



<p><strong>Specialization and Silos, Positioning and Potential:  How should you decide what your RCD team does and doesn’t do?</strong> discussion facilitated by Jonathan Dursi  </p>




<p><strong>HPC Leadership Institute</strong> <strong>overview</strong> with Andrew Jones</p>




<p><strong>Linux Clusters Institute Workshops overview</strong> with TBD</p>




<p><em>Wednesday, August 17th, 12p ET/ 11a CT/ 10a MT/ 9a PT/ 7a HT</em></p>




<p>Like a lot of us, Jonathan started his career doing research, and realized he could have a lot more impact (and fun!) supporting others research instead.&nbsp; Initially thinking that whole research computing and data (RCD) world was more or less like his large 3D fluid simulations, working at an HPC centre (and then coordinating HPC centres) introduced him to the much broader range of research problems relying on RCD resources and expertise.&nbsp; He then spent several years in genomics, first helping develop methods and run pipelines, and then running a national platform and software development effort connecting genomics and clinical data in a federated manner across Canada.&nbsp; Seeing the impact that RCD teams have had across so many fields, he’s become both pretty passionate about their importance in driving science and scholarship forward, and pretty frustrated by the lack of support and training new managers and leaders get when they step up and take on responsibility for these teams.&nbsp; RCD managers typically already have pretty advanced skills &#8211; but nobody shows them the basics of being a manager, or positioning an RCD practice.&nbsp; Now, in addition to his day job working at NVIDIA, he writes a newsletter for a slowly growing community of current and potential RCD managers and leaders, aiming to help them be more effective and less stressed managing these important teams of experts.</p>




<h3><a href="https://carcc.org/people-network/systems-facing-track/"><strong>Systems-Facing Track</strong></a><strong> (third Thursdays)</strong></h3>



<p><strong>Identifying Requirements for Early Career PT/FT RCD Systems Focused IT</strong>, discussion facilitated by Betsy Hillery &#8211; Purdue, Brian Haymore &#8211; University of Utah</p>




<p><em>Thu Aug 18th, 12p ET/ 11a CT/ 10a MT/ 9a PT</em></p>




<p>Recruiting the right people for RCD System’s IT Support is difficult.&nbsp; What are the minimum entry skills that you are looking for in new hires?&nbsp; This month we want the community to help define what early career skills are required for individuals to grow and be successful in your organization.&nbsp; Some points to think about in advance:</p>




<ul><li>What skills are required vs preferred?</li><li>What skills are the hardest to find in candidates or develop in new hires?</li><li>How does this change between smaller (wear many hats) and larger institutions (specialties)?</li><li>What additional, lacking or emerging skills should new team members focus on developing next?</li></ul>



<h2><em>Additional community opportunities:</em></h2>



<p>Aug 12 at 2p ET/ 1p CT/ 12p MT/ 11a PT: <strong>US Research Software Engineers</strong> monthly community call. See <a href="https://us-rse.org/calendar/">https://us-rse.org/calendar/</a> for more information.</p>




<h2><em>CaRCC Calls and Zoom:</em></h2>



<p>All calls will take place within the People Network Zoom room, distributed via email for security purposes.</p>